Good afternoon and welcome.
My name is Anna Tikhonova.
I'm an engineer on the OpenCL team.
Let's talk about adopting
OpenCL in your application.
So some of you in the audience
might be new to OpenCL.
So let's begin with what is
OpenCL and why should you use it?
So today's Macs have a multicore CPU with
a vector unit and one or more GPUs.
If you want to take advantage of all
this different hardware in your system,
it can be quite a challenge.
Because the programming approaches
for the multicore CPUs and for
the GPUs are quite different.
You will actually have to write
different versions of your
code for the CPU and the GPU.
So specifically,
to take advantage of a CPU,
you would need to split up the
work across multiple CPU cores
using Grand Central Dispatch.
And to utilize the vector unit,
you would need to write SAC or AVX code,
depending on the instruction set.
and then this multi-threaded, vectorized,
optimized CPU code will
not run on the GPU.
You would need to write a separate,
scalar version of the code for the GPU.
And I don't know about you,
but this sounds like a lot of work to me.
But OpenCL is here to help you.
OpenCL is a technology which enables you
to write parallel code which will run
efficiently on both the CPU and the GPU.
The language for writing
OpenCL programs is C-based,
which is good because most
of you are familiar with C,
and if you're new to OpenCL,
you will find it very
easy to get started.
The common code you will write for the
CPU and the GPU will be scalar in nature,
which is good because you have
to write just scalar code.
But you may be thinking,
how could this possibly give me
the best performance on the CPU?
Well, OpenCL does the work under the hood
for you with the Intel Auto-Vectorizer.
Your code will be compiled to
fully utilize the vector unit,
and you will get a performance
boost without doing any extra work.
OpenCL will also take care
of scheduling the work across
multiple CPU cores for you.
So this is of course a very brief
discussion of what is OpenCL and
what makes it so powerful.
If you're new to OpenCL,
if you need more introductory
level information,
at the end of this talk we will refer
you to some additional resources.
But for now, let's just take a look at
what's on the agenda today.
We have some new and very exciting
things for you in Mountain Lion.
First,
I will talk about what's new in 1.2,
OpenCL 1.2,
and then Sion Berkoviets from Intel will
talk about the improvements to the
Intel Auto-Vectorizer in Mountain Lion.
And then my colleague Eric will
talk about taking C code and turning
it into optimized OpenCL code.
and then his talk will be followed by
a presentation by Russell Williams and
David McGavin from Adobe.
They will talk about how they
use OpenCL in the recently
released Adobe Creative Suite 6.
So, let's get started.
The first 1.2 feature I will
talk about has to do with the
way you compile OpenCL programs.
But before I tell you exactly what it is,
let's just quickly review how you
usually compile OpenCL programs.
You have two options right now.
First one is online compilation.
So imagine you wrote some
OpenCL program and you need to compile
it for both the CPU and the GPU.
To do this, at runtime,
pass this OpenCL program
to the OpenCL compiler as a
plain text character string.
and then the compiler will build it for
you into device-specific executables.
Your second option is
offline compilation.
This option is specifically for those
of you who prefer to not ship source.
In this scenario,
you first use the offline OpenCL compiler
to compile the OpenCL code into bitcode.
And then at runtime, instead of loading
plain text source code,
just pass the bitcode to the
compiler and the compiler will build
device-specific executables for you.
And let me show you
exactly how to do this.
You can find the standalone
OpenCL compiler in the OpenCL framework.
And this is the path.
And this is the command
line we'd like you to use.
Please use the arch flag to specify
which architectures you're building for.
And, you know,
we've shown you this before,
but what's new in Mountain Lion is
that we now guarantee that if you build
your bitcode files in Mountain Lion,
you'll be able to run your programs
on any OS starting with Mountain Lion.
And in Mountain Lion,
we're also bringing the traditional
compilation and linking model to OpenCL.
And one of the cool things this allows
you to do is to create OpenCL libraries.
And you can use these libraries
in other OpenCL programs.
So how do you do that?
How do you create an OpenCL library?
Well, just as you would expect.
Imagine you have some OpenCL source code,
for example,
a collection of image processing filters,
several collections of
image processing filters,
and you'd like to create a
library of these filters.
So you just compile your code
into intermediate object files
and then link them together.
And then during the linking stage,
you have two options.
The first one is to generate
device-specific executables,
as before,
or you can create an OpenCL library.
So how do you use this library
in other OpenCL programs?
Well, once again,
just as you would expect,
just include a header file
for this OpenCL library in
your new OpenCL program,
compile the code for this program,
and then during the linking stage,
link in your library.
and then tell the compiler to generate
device-specific executables for you.
And that's it, you're done.
So that's it for this feature.
What else is new in Mountain Lion?
You're now also able to call
printf within your kernels.
When the kernel finishes executing,
the output of all the printf calls
will be flashed to standard out.
But there's one thing you should be
aware of when using printf in OpenCL.
If you have many work items
executing in parallel and all
of them are calling printf,
the order of the printf output for the
different work items is not guaranteed.
So, for example,
you can't expect that the work
item with the global IT zero
will print to standard out first.
Let's look at an example.
Imagine you have a whole bunch of
work items executing in parallel
and all of them are computing an
index into some global data buffer.
And you're trying to use printf to
print out these indices to standard out.
And this is the kind
of output you will see.
So if you look at this,
this is not very helpful.
What is going on here?
Which work item is
outputting which index?
You don't know.
So we recommend that you always print
out the global work item ID along with
the data that you're printing out.
And this way you can really
figure out what's going on.
Another cool thing about Printf in
OpenCL is that it supports vector types.
So here are a few examples of how you
can use Printf to output vector data.
Please note the vector specifier V,
which is followed by number 4.
So this number stands for the size
of the vector you're printing out.
And here is the output for
these different Printf calls.
Please note that the data for
the different vector components
is separated by commas.
So this is it for Printf.
What else is new in Mountain Lion?
In Lion, you were only able to overload
built-in OpenCL functions.
And now we enable you to overload
functions that you write.
Just use the overload attribute.
So imagine you're working on
a function that graphs data.
And you can do something like this
to have one version that handles
integer input and another version
that handles floating point data.
Or you can use the overload attribute.
And this will make your code
more clear and more readable.
Also, when you're using OpenCL,
it's always better if you give us
more information about what you're
doing so that we can possibly give
you better performance under the hood.
So for example,
there's some commonly used
operations such as filling memory.
You're probably using
kernels to do this right now.
In Mountain Lion, we also have some new
convenient APIs for you.
So one to fill a buffer with
a pattern and another one to
fill an image with a color.
If you use these APIs,
we know what you're doing.
We can possibly give you
really good performance.
performance.
also give us more information about
how you're using your memory objects.
So for example,
if you know that you're only going to
be writing to a memory object from host,
tell us with this flag and we will know
that the data for this memory object
does not need to be cached because
you're not going to be reading it,
we won't let you,
and the cache can be used more
efficiently for other memory objects
that you will be reading or writing.
Also, if you are working on modifying
a memory object on the GPU and
you're also enqueuing a map
command to modify it on the CPU,
and that you know that right now
you're using this map command to
overwrite the data in the mapped region.
So tell us with this flag.
And we will know that if the most
up-to-date data is on the GPU,
we don't need to copy it to the
CPU as we would normally do because
you're just going to overwrite it.
It's just going to be
a waste of resources.
And finally,
we've deprecated some APIs on you.
We replaced them with new ones.
So check the new headers,
use the new APIs, and if you forget,
the compiler will remind you.
So this is all for
what's new in OpenCL 1.2.
And now I will invite Sion Berković
to talk about the improvements to the
Intel Auto-Vectorizer in Mountain Lion.
So hi, everybody.
I'm Sion.
I work at Intel on developing
the auto-vectorizer,
which I'm going to tell you about now.
So I'm going to start with a short
recap of what the auto-vectorizer is.
Then I'll tell you about
what's new in Mountain Lion.
I'll explain a little bit about how
the auto-vectorizer actually works.
And I'll give a few tips about
how to write code efficiently in
the presence of the vectorizer.
Then I'll show a short demo.
So if you developed already
some OpenCL code for the CPU,
you must have seen that getting
performance out of it is not so trivial.
It requires adding some optimizations
which are target specific,
most notably dealing
with vectors efficiently.
It also loses its
performance portability,
meaning that different targets
or different architectures
may require somewhat different
optimizations to be really optimal.
So that's why we introduced
the auto-vectorizer.
It's basically a CPU compiler
optimization for OpenCL,
which was introduced in OpenCL for Lion.
And it basically adds for you the
optimization to use the vector registers
or SIMD registers in the architecture.
The way this works is the auto-vectorizer
basically packs together several
work items into the vector registers.
Each vector lane represents a
different work item of your work.
Some of the features of the
auto-vectorizer as existed in Lion is,
again, it runs by default when
you compile for the CPU.
It does not require any user
intervention to actually run.
It works well in the presence of
both scalar and vector operations
that the user added to the kernel.
However, it only worked in the
absence of control flow.
So, introducing the new
auto-vectorizer in Mountain Lion.
The major addition that we did was the
introduction of support for control flow.
Now when I say control flow,
I mean more or less all the known styles,
if-then-else blocks, loops, for loops,
while loops, every nested form of those.
Also, the vectorizer automatically
optimizes the code to the
underlying CPU architecture,
and by that providing significant
speedup compared to non-vectorized code.
However,
the speedup itself may vary depending
on the use of control flow in the code.
Now, to explain why that is,
I'll go now into some more details
of how the auto-vectorizer actually
works dealing with control flow.
I start with a simple example
of an if-then-else block.
So the problem with standard if-then-else
code is that different work items
of your open-series application may
choose a different path in the code.
And since the vectorizer
tries to pack everything,
several work items into
a single instruction,
then it has a problem there.
How can it pack it when they are
going in different directions?
And the way this should work is
that the auto vectorizer should
basically execute both the then
and the else side of the statement.
And to do this,
the vectorizer serializes the
code and executes both sides.
However, unneeded calculations along the
way are disposed and in the case of
instructions with side effects such
as every kind of memory access,
those instructions are avoided.
So, in this case,
the vectorizer is not able
to execute the instructions.
So, in this case,
the vectorizer is not able
to execute the instructions.
So, in this case,
the vectorizer is not able
to execute the instructions.
So, in this case,
the vectorizer is not able
to execute the instructions.
So, in this case,
the vectorizer is not able
to execute the instructions.
So, in this case,
the vectorizer is not able
to execute the instructions.
So, in this case, the vectorizer avoided.
However,
there is one case of uniform control
flow in which case all the work items
go in the exact same direction and
this is detectable during compilation
and then the code itself is not
modified as it works just as is.
Now, in the case of loops,
we have a slightly different problem.
Different work items may actually
iterate over a loop for a
different amount of iterations.
In the example here,
you can see that you have a loop
where every work item basically
iterates the amount equal to its ID.
So how can you pack several
work items into instructions
when you have this thing?
So, basically what the auto-vectorizer
does in the case of loops,
it iterates over the loop for
an amount which is enough for
all the work items it packed,
and it continues iterating until all
the work items finish their work,
and it will only continue executing past
the loop after all the work items have
finished doing their loop iterations.
So now I'll give a couple of tips
for programming efficiently in the
presence of the auto-vectorizer.
So one thing is about memory
access in control flow.
So as I said earlier,
memory accesses in control flow
need to be masked because some
work items may have to avoid them.
So adding this masking adds overhead
and basically penalizes performance.
So the recommendation is avoid as much
as possible having the explicit memory
accesses inside the control flow.
Try to move them out.
As you can see in the small example here,
there is a memory write inside both
the then and the else side of the if,
and that can be moved outside the
control flow statement and replaced
with a temporary write to register.
The second tip is about
row-wise data access.
The way the auto-vectorizer works
is it packs together several work
items which have consecutive indices,
global IDs, in global dimension zero.
That means that when the
kernel accesses array elements,
for example,
it is preferred to access consecutive
array elements in consecutive work items.
As you can see in the small example here,
access to array A is consecutive,
while in the case of array B,
the access is trided.
That means that when
the code is vectorized,
the vectorizer can basically
emit a single vector load
in the case of array A.
However, in the case of array B,
it has to do several scalar loads and
gather the results to a vector register.
So now I'll show a short example,
the new vectorizer.
So I start with more or less
the same example that we showed
last year for the vectorizer.
This is nine high-definition
movies running in parallel,
and we apply some image filters on them.
Now, as you can see on the frames
per second bar on the top,
the frame per second rate
doesn't decrease too much in
the presence of these filters.
However, this time around,
we added a new filter,
which is a wave simulation,
which is a kind of physics simulator.
Now, this contains a lot of control flow,
and the old vectorizer
does not work on it.
And as you can see,
performance goes down tremendously.
If I try to use this,
you can see that the wave is
slowly moving on the screen.
If I do some more,
I can slow it even more.
Now, with the new vectorizer,
we have a new filter.
It's easy to -- you just get
speed up by vectorizing also the
control flow in the new filter.
And also, with this,
I can even turn on the rain feature,
which basically does a whole
lot of raindrops altogether.
And as you can see, even with that,
performance is hardly impacted at all.
So to summarize,
the auto-vectorizer is an
optimization that exists in
OpenCL running behind the scenes.
You don't need to do
anything to turn it on.
And it basically optimizes your code.
And now in Mountain Lion,
it optimizes it even if it includes
a complex control flow inside,
giving you performance.
So thank you.
And I'd like to invite Eric to
talk about OpenCL optimizations.
Good afternoon.
My name is Eric and today I will
tell you about OpenCL code tuning.
Let me show you some numbers.
So this has a running speed
of a Gaussian blur algorithm
on a 16 million pixel image.
I will tell you details
about this algorithm later.
This first one is what
we get when we run it.
So just a straight forward
implementation of it on the CPU.
And then you take the same code and
port it to OpenCL and you get this.
And after a few steps of tuning,
you can reach that.
Yeah.
And this is what I'm going
to tell you about now.
Okay, let's go.
So to do this we'll follow
this very simple program.
Yeah, it reminds me when -- okay, anyway.
So first we'll choose
a suitable algorithm.
Then code it to OpenCL,
benchmark it and decide if
it's fast enough or not.
And if it's not fast enough,
just identify why and find a way to
fix it and start all over to line 10.
So first we need to know what
fast enough means and how to
choose a suitable algorithm.
So to know what is fast enough,
the simplest way is just to
benchmark code on the GPU.
And we will use very simple kernels.
So this is what I call the copy kernel.
It takes an image stored in a buffer.
and puts it,
read it from the input buffer,
the in pointer here and write
it to the output buffer.
Okay.
So, this function is run for
all pixels of the image.
So, we will schedule 16 million of it.
And the first thing we do
inside the function is to get
which pixel we should process.
This is X and Y.
And then we just read one value,
one float value from the input buffer
and write it to the output buffer.
Benchmarking this,
we will get the best speed
we can expect for the GPU.
All right?
And then there's a MAT kernel.
MAT is for multiply plus add.
So, we read the value like we did before
and do a few floating point operations
on it like three here before storing
it back to the output buffer.
And we'll change the number of
floating point operations we'll do.
Okay.
Let's benchmark
Now, so this is on a Mac Pro AMD GPU.
And this is what we
get with a copy kernel,
like 13.5
Giga pixels per second.
OK, now let's add the
floating point operations.
Okay, this is with three
floating-point operations.
As you can see,
we get almost the same speed,
which means that actually the
MAT kernel is memory-bound and we
are still waiting for memory and the
floating-point operations are free.
Okay, let's add more.
Six.
Same.
Twelve.
18.
Okay.
And then we start finally
to see something with 24
floating point operations.
So usually it means that what we want
for a suitable algorithm is to have
first to be embarrassingly parallel.
It means you process the same
thing for all pixels of the image.
Then as we have seen,
usually memory will be
the first bottleneck.
So you want to minimize memory accesses.
And then you want to increase
the compute to memory ratio.
And then from this benchmark
we can get an estimate of the
running speed of our code.
Okay,
so now we are ready to choose algorithm.
And I will present you some
Gaussian blur algorithm.
This is actually the definition
of the Gaussian blur.
So the cute green curve is a
Gaussian with a sigma equal five.
And so to compute the convolution we
need in this case 31 by 31 filter.
So that will at the end,
if you use this definition to compute it,
we'll do almost 1,000 image
accesses and 2,000 floating
point operations per pixel.
This is huge.
Fortunately, we have a lot of data
The Gaussian filter is separable.
It means that it's a product
of two one-dimensional filters.
And in this case, we can compute the same
thing by processing two
one-dimensional convolutions,
one horizontal on each row and
one vertical on each column,
and we get the same thing.
And the cost in memory
and flops is much lower.
And then there is a third algorithm which
is called Recursive Gaussian Filter.
This one does not compute the
exact Gaussian blur actually,
but a good approximation of it.
So it works sequentially on each
row and we have this kind of green
spider moving from left to right.
And the first pass will take the input,
the red line,
and produce a temporary output,
the blue thing.
And then it will come back
from the right to the left,
read the input again and the blue
thing again and produce the output,
the yellow curve.
Okay, and this... Okay,
to apply this to a two-dimensional image,
you will then need four passes,
that's spiders,
so one spider for each row from left
to right and then right to left,
and the same thing vertically.
And so the final cost for this one is 10
memory accesses and 64 flops per pixel.
Okay, this thing finishes?
Okay, done.
So I've showed you three
algorithms for Gaussian blur.
I put them back all together on this
table with the copy kernel first.
So the first column is the number
of memory accesses per pixel.
Then you have the number of flaps
and the compute memory ratio.
And the last column is very interesting.
It's the estimated running speed
obtained from the copy kernel.
So you see the last one
does five times more memory
accesses than the copy kernel.
So it's one-fifth of the speed.
Actually,
this is the one we'll be implementing,
obviously.
It's supposed to be faster.
Okay, let's do it.
That's line 10.
This is the code.
I try to simplify it so the gray
lines... We will learn one of these
functions for each row of the image.
This is a horizontal path.
And the first thing we do in
this kernel is to figure out
which row we must update.
This is a Y.
And then we'll do a loop on X from
left to right and from right to left.
At each step of the loop,
we load one input value
and store one output value.
And there's a backward loop below it.
And this is a vertical kernel.
It does exactly the same thing
but with X and Y exchange.
So we run one of these for
each column of the image.
Right, now we have the code.
Let's benchmark it.
That's 27 million pixels per second.
Didn't I say 2800?
Well, so clearly we have a --
something is slow here.
So let's see in detail the
respective speeds of the two
horizontal and vertical passes.
This is vertical pass is quite fast,
which is almost 2 gigapixels per second.
But we have an issue
with horizontal pass.
It's this incredibly slow.
So why?
Usually the The usual suspect in
this case is a memory access pattern.
So imagine inside the GPU you have a
schedule of 16 million functions to call,
and they will be called by
groups of 300 at the same time.
And you will have these 300
work items requesting memory
access with a different address.
This is what I call the
memory access pattern.
And so the hardware is
optimized for certain accesses
and it does it very fast.
And in the other cases,
accesses will be conflicting and
then they will be serialized and
running time will be very slow.
So how to identify these patterns?
We can show some simple rules.
So this is a fast case.
This is when each consecutive
work items will access consecutive
addresses in the buffers.
This is the case the
hardware goes very fast.
We want this.
And for image processing,
this is when consecutive
work items access consecutive
pixels in the same row.
And this is a slow case.
It's almost the same,
but we access the buffer with a stride.
Here it's 1024.
So in this case,
all hardware requests will end
up in the same memory channel or
bank and we'll have conflicts and
the accesses will be serialized.
It will be extremely slow.
So in image processing,
this is when consecutive
work items access consecutive
pixels in the same column.
Right.
So let's see how we can... Oh yeah.
And then in the other cases,
you just need to benchmark the
code to see in which case you are.
So let's see if I can
identify the patterns in the
kernels we have just seen.
This is a copy kernel.
So as you can see,
consecutive work items will
have consecutive values of x.
This is a global ID 0.
And then in this case,
access to the input buffer will be fast
because we access consecutive values,
consecutive addresses in the buffer.
And the access to the
output buffer will be fast.
So now let's look at the vertical path.
In this case again,
consecutive worker times will
have consecutive values of X,
and we will do fast accesses to
the input and output buffers.
Now,
let's have a look at the horizontal one.
So in this case,
consecutive work items will
have consecutive values of y.
And as you can see, the stride for the
access is w in this case.
So when w will be larger,
it will be in the slow case.
This is what we have seen actually,
and this is why the
horizontal kernel is slow.
Okay,
so we have identified the bottleneck.
Now, how do we solve it?
Actually, there is a very simple
solution in this case,
just to drop it.
We can use the vertical one
and do transpose after it,
and then transpose again
after another vertical pass,
like this.
So you do vertical pass, transpose,
do it again, and transpose.
So if we assume we can
do a fast transpose,
this is supposed to be faster
than the horizontal plus vertical,
okay?
So now we need a transpose kernel.
Yeah, so we can update our
estimate of the running time.
So we will do two more passes.
Transpose will be run
with two memory accesses.
We do that two times,
so that's 14 memory accesses.
And the estimate drops to 2,000
million pixels per second.
So how do we transpose?
Actually,
transposing is just like copying.
So we read x, y and start with y,
x instead of x, y again.
So it's almost the same
kernel as a copy kernel.
All right.
And within this case,
the access to the input
buffer will be fast,
but the access to the output
buffer will be slow because it
will be done with a stride of H.
So let's benchmark it.
Okay, and we see exactly what we expect
that it's after edge becomes larger,
will be slower.
So how do we solve this?
Another usual solution to this
issue is to move the problem
to a faster memory level.
Inside the GPU, we have processing cores,
that's the yellow boxes here,
and each core has arithmetic units,
registers, local memory,
and everything is connected
to a global memory.
And then it's connected to the host,
the Mac.
Okay, the speed of this connection
is 10 gigabytes per second.
It's pretty slow actually.
And then each layer of memory is 10
times faster than the previous one,
more or less.
So that would be 100 gigabytes
per second for the global memory,
1,000 for the local one,
and 10,000 for registers.
So morality of this,
when your data is moved
to the upper levels,
you want to reuse it as much as you can.
And also you want to avoid
host-to-device transfers.
So what we will do is move our
problem to the local memory.
Just like this.
So we'll have a workgroup,
a block of work items,
loading a small block of the image,
storing it in local memory,
And then when all the work items in
the group are finished doing that,
moving it back again
to the output buffer.
Okay, let's write the code for this.
It becomes a little longer,
but it's not very complicated.
BX and BY will be the workgroup
coordinates and they will be mapped
to BX/BY blocks in the image.
And IX and IY are the pixel
coordinates inside the block.
And then we'll just... Each work item
will load one value from the input buffer
to the temporary local memory buffer,
this hoax.
Then we'll wait for all
work items to do that.
That's a barrier call.
And then we'll store the temporary
buffer back to global memory output.
And in this case,
both accesses to global memory are fast.
Because consecutive work at times
will have consecutive value of ix.
Okay, let's benchmark it.
This might be faster.
Oh, sabotage.
It's not fast at all.
So yeah, why?
We must now consider globally
what happens inside the GPU.
So we have all these workgroups,
and each workgroup will be
mapped to a core inside the CPU.
Let's say if you have 10 cores,
the first 10 workgroups will be
executed by the 10 cores together.
So they will all do the
input accesses together.
And it will be fine,
because it will be on the same rows.
But then, when they want to store the
result in the output buffer,
they want to access the same columns.
And they will be
conflicting in this case.
So how do we solve this?
We can just change how the workgroups
are mapped to the image blocks.
Instead of mapping them by rows,
we'll just map them diagonally like this.
In this case,
the accesses to the input buffer
will be fast and so will the
accesses to the output buffer.
Actually, the change in the code to
do this is pretty small.
It's just adding one line.
You just change how the
world groups coordinates are
mapped to the image blocks.
Okay, now let's benchmark it.
Ah, now it's faster.
Good.
Right,
so let's take this transpose kernel
and with the vertical recursive
Gaussian kernel and put that,
everything together.
And this is what we get.
All right.
We can reach something like
650 million pixels per second.
You tell me, didn't he say 2,000?
Yes.
So, something is still slow here.
The issue we have now is we
are running only not enough
work items to saturate the GPU.
We are running one work item
for each column of the image.
And that will be something
like thousands of work items.
But actually, it's not enough to hide all
latencies inside the GPU.
So, we need to find another
algorithm using more work items.
But this will be a
subject for another talk.
So, let me summarize.
So actually this simple procedure and
we have followed it and in a few steps
we have obtained a significant speedup.
I just want to add a few things to this.
After you write the code,
just check the output you get with
reference implementations because
otherwise it's quite easy to get much
faster but with the wrong output.
So yeah, you need a reference
implementation somewhere.
And second thing,
don't give up at the first try.
Usually with very simple changes,
you can get much faster code.
Well, thank you.
I will invite on the scene Russell.
Hi, my name is Russell Williams.
I'm one of the architects on Photoshop.
And I'm going to show you how we used
OpenCL to speed up one of the cool
features in the new Photoshop CS6.
I'll just start off with a demo here.
And what this feature is,
is it's a blur gallery.
It's a collection of creative
blur effects like tilt shift,
which is a popular effect now.
What I'm going to show you right
now is called a field blur,
where you put pins on the image
and adjust how blurry you want that
general area of the image to be.
And the blur filter interpolates
between those things.
And first I'm going to run it on the CPU.
And this is a hand-optimized
SSE hand-threaded CPU implementation.
And you can see we used all 24 threads,
all 12 cores on that.
And it took 5.2 seconds
down there in the corner.
And if I just go in here and
turn on OpenCL and rerun that,
didn't even get a progress bar,
1.8 seconds.
So that was a pretty good speedup
and that's against the very fastest
12-core Mac there is on the CPU side.
So that's really good.
What was it?
That was about a 200 line,
just a very small OpenCL kernel,
not doing a Gaussian blur but
simulating lens optics of a blur.
It gives a much more aesthetically
pleasing and realistic result.
And we broke the image into 2K by 2K,
4 megapixel blocks in order to fit an
arbitrarily big image on the GPU and
I'll talk about that again in a second.
So why did we use OpenCL for this?
We've done a lot of blur filters
and other things before and
never used OpenCL in the past
and now we're starting to use it.
Well, first of all,
we wanted to use the GPU and
OpenCL is the only cross-platform
GPGPU solution available.
There are other GPGPU languages
like NVIDIA's CUDA,
but they aren't cross-platform
and for us that's a deal killer.
Why didn't we use OpenGL?
Well, we've used OpenGL in the past
and we will use OpenGL for more
Photoshop features in the future.
But OpenGL is fundamentally
a 3D rendering package,
a geometry rendering package.
And in order to do something in OpenGL,
you have to recast your
problem into those terms.
And it's got a steep learning curve.
You've got to get your head around
all of that 3D rendering stuff
before you can write your algorithm.
And if all you've got is a matrix
of numbers and you want to run
an algorithm on them and you
get a matrix of numbers out,
OpenCL is just far simpler,
both to write and to learn.
Also, in the last year,
I said portability or cross-platform
is very important to us.
And OpenCL really hit a new level of
maturity and ubiquity in the last year.
It's now shipped as part of the
standard user mode install drivers
on the Windows side for NVIDIA,
AMD, and Intel integrated graphics.
Now, I originally titled
this OpenCL challenges,
but really they're
challenges for anything,
doing anything on the GPU.
And we were just using
OpenCL on the GPU this time.
We did our traditional
hand-coded version on the CPU.
So the challenges on the GPU are,
first of all,
you need an algorithm that takes
advantage of one of the two things that
the GPU can do better than the GPU.
One is a bunch of compute,
and the other is memory bandwidth.
That however many gigabytes per
second the GPU has to its memory
is much greater than the bandwidth
the CPU has to its memory.
And our blur kernel,
like the Gaussian example you just saw,
will in fact scale more
with GPU bandwidth.
If you have a GPU with
greater memory bandwidth,
our blur gets faster.
If you have a GPU that has the same
memory bandwidth but more compute,
it doesn't get any faster because
we're still using up those free flops.
He told you about the
first 20 flops are free.
And of course, the algorithm needs to be
embarrassingly parallel.
You need to be able to compute
multiple output results independently
without having one depend on the last.
It's really helpful to have,
as he mentioned,
have a debug reference implementation.
We were developing this lens blur
algorithm at the same time we
were developing the OpenCL kernel,
and that made things take a lot longer.
It's much easier if you know what
answer you're expecting so that
you can more easily debug OpenCL.
For debugging your algorithm,
Xcode's debugger is much
easier to deal with.
There's always a desire,
at least in the marketing department,
to say, "Oh, we did it on the GPU and now
it's ten times faster." Well,
it's not going to be a single number,
right, because the GPU and the
CPU are independent variables.
That same GPU will be a lot faster
compared to the GPU on the PC.
So, it's not going to be a single number,
right, because the GPU and the
CPU are independent variables.
to the CPU if you put it
in a six-core Mac Pro.
And I say unpredictable.
What I mean there is you
have to be empirical.
Just like this whole last
talk about optimizing,
just looking at it up front and saying,
well, this only needs to do so many
flops and so many memory accesses,
and so it ought to be 10 times faster.
You have to actually implement it and
optimize it and go through that little
basic algorithm in order to find out
how much faster it's going to be.
We are constantly prototyping algorithms
to see which ones will be suitable.
We have to deal with resource limits.
If you're dealing with just a
screen image and you know the
number of pixels you're computing
or how many fit on the screen,
that's probably not a problem.
But Photoshop tries to deal
with arbitrarily large images,
multi-gigabyte images.
And so the memory on the
GPU is not virtualized for you.
And so we break up the image
into four megapixel chunks,
and stitch them back together.
Similarly, there's no preemptive
multitasking out there.
And typically, if you're just running
through a bunch of pixels,
it's not a big problem.
But if you have some iterative
convergence algorithm,
you can't just have something
out there running for 30 seconds.
It'll lock up the screen interaction,
and the operating system will kill your
process because it doesn't like that.
So you have to break up your problem
into manageable-sized chunks.
And then finally,
if you're just coding for the Mac,
you're pretty golden.
That's a much easier issue.
If you're determined
to be cross-platform,
then you have this problem of
not only do you have a couple of
operating system versions on the Mac,
but you've got the Windows side
with NVIDIA drivers,
AMD drivers,
and Intel integrated graphics drivers,
and they're all updated at
different times and independently.
And so it really blows
up your test matrix.
But even with all those challenges,
we would definitely do it again.
And as I said, we're actually going
to be doing it again.
And so we're going to be doing it again.
And as I said,
we're actually in the process of
prototyping more algorithms to see
what we'll put in the next version.
And the other thing is that just
in some very preliminary work,
we've seen really great results
from the AutoVectorizer for running
OpenCL on the CPU in Mountain Lion.
And so we'll be looking
at doing more of that.
And with that,
I'll turn it over to my coworker,
Dave McGavran, and they've done some
really amazing stuff,
and a lot of it, in Premiere Pro.
Thank you.
Hi there.
My name is David McGavern.
I'm the engineering manager
for Adobe Premiere Pro.
And we've been doing GPU optimizations
for quite a while now.
But about a year ago,
we wanted to really see what
we were going to do with CS6.
And we had sort of two goals with CS6.
We didn't just want, you know,
a certain amount of effects to go
faster or some things to go faster.
We liked that idea,
but we really wanted to be able to change
the way that we do video workflows.
We wanted editors to actually have
a different way that they can now
use the application to do more
creative things with their work.
And so when we looked at how
we were going to do that,
we had two goals.
One, we wanted to be able to
do it on both platforms.
And two, we wanted to be able to
do it on the Mac laptop.
The 15-inch laptop is extremely
popular for our customers,
and we really wanted to
be able to support that.
And when you look at really how
you can go about doing that,
the only answer that
you can go at is OpenCL.
So we looked at jumping into OpenCL.
We looked at the OpenCL for Premiere CS6,
and we went really all the way in.
You'll see we ported our entire
video pipeline to OpenCL,
not just a little bit, all of it.
And working with Apple and
our other partners,
we will have a pretty compelling
reason why that our users will
now have a different workflow
when they're editing video.
So I'm going to show you a quick demo.
So here you can see
Adobe Premiere Pro CS6,
and we're going to show you
a few interesting ways that
our workflows have changed.
So down here in the bottom right,
this is our timeline window.
What you're seeing there is
four individual HD frames,
and we put a scale and a position on
them so they're picture-in-picture.
And one of the new features we have
is the adjustment layer feature,
and you might be familiar with this
from Photoshop or After Effects.
Having this in a video editor
that does real-time video
editing is pretty compelling,
and it's a new feature in CS6.
So what that allows you to do is
instead of adding effects just
to the individual video clips,
you can now add an effect
to the adjustment layer,
and that will change everything
that's under the adjustment
layer as a total component.
So the first thing I'm going to do here
is I'm going to go over to the effects,
and I'm going to add a three-way color
corrector to the adjustment layer.
So I'm going to go over to the effects,
and I'm going to add a three-way color
corrector to the adjustment layer.
So here we go.
So what we're going to do is we're
going to grade that composite
of those four HD streams.
So here we go.
We're going to make it very colorful.
And it took a little while because it's
actually a pretty complex optimization.
And that's a really good
feature for our users.
They get to now grade an entire
composite of video edits.
But it's not really
what we were aiming for.
We really wanted to change workflows.
We wanted people to be able
to stay creative in real time.
So I'm going to go in here and
I'm going to turn on OpenCL.
Again,
this is on the 2011 MacBook Pro 15-inch.
So here we are now,
and so now I'm going to actually
use another feature which
we call Don't Stop Playback.
So now we're actually playing
that back in real time,
which is 4 HD streams with some
scales and some positions and
a three-way color corrector.
And when I say that we can now
do things that we were never
able to do before with OpenCL,
I'm now actually grading that whole thing
in real time without dropping any frames.
That's a very different workflow
for our customers and very powerful,
and that's a lot of computational
power going on there.
But that's not it.
We can now go and add more effects.
So while I'm editing,
I can go and grab more effects
and add them to the video stream.
So we'll just add a
brightness and contrast here.
And again, editing is not stopping.
We're not dropping frames on a 15-inch
laptop with a lot of HD streams.
And I can just continue to
edit this way without stopping,
being very creative and staying in
the workflow and not being distracted.
Now, I actually didn't even
tell you all the truth.
In fact, each of those video streams
also has effects on them.
So I can go to one of those other
video streams and you'll see
another three-way color corrector.
And I can do that and you'll see
that one of the screens -- I don't
remember which one -- will be
changing as I update that one.
There you go, on the bottom left there.
And each of those video streams has that.
So now we have a very large collection
of video algorithms working in parallel
and not stopping on a 15-inch laptop.
And this is how we can use
OpenCL to really change the
way video editors edit video.
So that was that.
So how did we do this?
So we've been -- like I said,
we've been working with
GPU stuff for a while,
and we've also been working with
multiprocessing for a while.
And so we've done something that
helped us is that we broke up our
pipeline into multiple stages.
And the first thing we'll do is
we'll start on those HD frames and
we'll start reading them from disk.
And we'll be doing that in parallel.
And we'll be doing as much as we can
at once ahead of time of the play
head where you're seeing it play.
And then we'll start
doing some CPU processing.
Now, what's very important is for us,
we didn't want to throw every
single thing up onto the GPU because
then you'd have a whole bunch
of CPUs not doing anything,
which would be the inverse problem
that we had a couple years back.
So we do some CPU processing.
And in that,
maybe we'll do an H2640 code or
we'll do some other codec work.
And there's a few effects that we
didn't actually get to in OpenCL,
so we'll do those.
And we'll do that as a subtree render.
So we'll package everything
under the non-GPU code together.
And at that point, we're ready to go.
And we'll start to upload it.
And all of this is going
in parallel together.
And at this point,
we get it up onto the GPU and
the GPU becomes a coprocessor.
And so while the disk I/O is going
on and the CPU processing going on,
the GPU starts cranking
away and doing all its work.
Then we either go out to display using an
OpenGL interop or we bring it back down
to the system memory to do an export.
So here, you get an idea of how
much we actually did.
Again, we started this a year ago.
And there was a lot of people
who were pretty skeptical
when I came in this room.
And they said,
we're going to port to OpenCL.
That's a lot of GPU work that we do.
And so what you can see is in the
intrinsics there in that first
top left column is just the things
that a user may not always see.
We're doing deinterlacing, compositing,
blending modes, nested sequences.
All that stuff is what
the user doesn't see.
And then you have a series
of transitions and effects.
And those are the things that
the user actually applies.
All of these are optimized
for the GPU using OpenCL.
And that's pretty impressive in the
time that we had to get this done.
So not only that, on top of all that,
we get to do bigger frame sizes.
We get to do deeper color.
And we have this all in
a floating point space.
So it's not even just faster.
It's also better quality.
So what did we learn from doing this?
Well, it was a lot of work
to do this in a year,
and there was a lot of
things we had to learn.
So one of the first things you
saw is when Ana was talking,
she talked about how you had to
load up these kernels at run time.
There's a lot of kernels.
And some of those kernels are
broken into multiple kernels.
So we had a lot of stuff getting
loaded up and compiling at run time.
We needed to load those
asynchronously or we didn't get
a very good user experience.
So by loading them asynchronously,
we can get to the situation where a
kernel was needed before it was ready.
So we then actually preempt those
asynchronous loadings so that
we pick the kernels that are
most important at the right time.
So that changed the user experience,
and now you don't even know
that compiling is really going
on when you're launching.
We also had a lot of work to get
OpenCL Interop high enough performant.
There's a number of ways to do it,
and we tried them all,
and we did a lot of benchmarking.
And what we came to is that
CL Create from GL Buffer and
CL In-Q Acquire GL Objects were the way
to go for both the upload and download.
These were the things that
gave us the best performance.
Then comes the question of
OpenCL images versus buffers.
They're both sort of independent
ways to deal with memory on the GPU.
And the OpenCL images actually
fits our model better.
It's a 2D, you know,
optimized version to get to video frames,
which fits what we're doing.
But for the most part,
we actually settled in on
buffers for a couple reasons.
Buffers allowed us to do better caching.
We can actually manage
that memory better,
and we had a lot of frames
in parallel as you saw.
It also allows us to read and write to
the same -- to the same buffer at once,
which is very important
for a lot of our kernels.
In the year that we had,
you heard Russell say that
things have really matured.
We started on when we were doing a big
thing and our code wasn't working right,
and there was still
growth areas in OpenCL,
so we actually had trouble
with pinned memory,
which is a shame because that
actually brings a lot of performance.
At the time, we had to avoid it because
we couldn't get it to work,
which is probably our fault.
So we're going to go back
and look at that again,
but that's something to keep in
mind that using pinned memory
will give you better performance,
but it was tricky for
us to get it to work.
We also had trouble with structures
passing them up to the kernels.
We couldn't always get
the alignment right,
so we found a good way to get
around that is to just flatten
the structures and move on and
not spend too much time there.
Also very importantly,
and you've probably heard this
a lot since you've been at WWDC,
filing radars.
The OpenCL team has been extremely
responsive when we've found performance
issues or concerns either helping us fix
our code or fixing bugs in a few cases.
So file radars,
and that's a really great way
to get things taken care of.
So when we look at all that
we've achieved with OpenCL,
there's still some things that
we can brainstorm about that are
still possible in a video editing
application to do with OpenCL.
We can continue to increase
the set of effects.
There's a few effects that we have that
we don't have OpenCL implementations for.
It is a little bit of a problem
there because not all of
those are in use all the time,
and there's maybe more work
than needed for the amount of
people who use those effects,
but there's always some there.
We can start looking at making sure
that our third-party developers
who write plug-ins for Premiere has
the opportunity to write.
So we can start looking at making
sure that our third-party developers
who write plug-ins for Premiere has
the opportunity to write.
So we can start looking at making
sure that our third-party developers
who write plug-ins for Premiere has
the opportunity to write.
GPU effects, which they can do now,
but it's not really optimized
to fit within our pipeline.
We can look at doing codecs,
GPU encoding and decoding
of certain codecs,
and that would be very
interesting in some cases.
But again,
we want to be careful not to let the
CPUs sit there idle because then we're
wasting resources on the machine.
We can look if there's an opportunity
to take care of multiple CPUs at once
when those configurations are available.
And we have some scopes that
we'd like to -- you know,
we can see some nice optimizations there.
Also, there's, you know,
effects that we -- we
can look at doing codecs,
and that would be very
interesting in some cases.
But again,
we want to be careful not to let the
CPUs sit there idle because then we're
wasting resources on the machine.
So,
we -- we could probably do an OpenCL that
actually would never make sense in
software just because they're so slow.
Customers only want to wait so long.
And OpenCL actually brings some
opportunities where we can do some
things we've never done before.
So that's Adobe Premiere Pro CS6
and how we use OpenCL.
If you have any questions,
you can come find us.
I'll be hanging out at the session
tomorrow morning at the lab.
So I'm going to give it back to Ananau,
and
If you have any questions about
what you've seen today or any
questions about OpenCL in general,
contact Alan Schaffer.
He's our graphics and game
technologies evangelist.
And also, if you're new to OpenCL,
here's a link to the
past WWDC presentations.
And you can also go to the
Apple Developer Forums.
Thank you very much for coming.